---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/digital-brain/020-product/020-1-random-ideas/"}
---

A collection of random solutions to problems. The ideas need more thought... or it's a terrible idea and deserves no further thought, but I'm documenting for the sake of it.

- Problem: Nonprofits, especially small ones, are about 1-3 years (sometimes more) behind technology. Mostly because of resources 
- Solution: Build an AI copilot agent specifically for nonprofit founders to accelerate whatever they need to do. The AI operates like a person where it can guide the founder on what it can do and train the person on how to write effective prompts.

- Problem: Having to type my credit card, drivers license, etc. is a pain
- Solution: A tool where you'd use your phone to scan a credit card or driver's license and it automatically fills in the form fields without needing to take a picture or copy/pasting. Some websites already have this feature, banks do when depositing a check on their app. But this app works on any form or website and the data isn't stored.

- Problem: The problem is that it's not easy for startup founders to understand who their users are and learn the exact user story of how they found out about the business. Radio buttons on a "How did you hear about us?" has terrible accuracy. Surveys suck, conversational is way better.
- Solution: When a new user signs up or new customer purchases, they get an automated email and it's a conversational tone that's in the body or in the P.S., it goes something like "Hey firstname, thanks for signing up. I'd like to know a little bit more about you so I can build a better product. Can you tell me a little bit more about you? Your name, what you do for work, how you found out about us, and anything else you'd like to share." Then that information is stored and analyzed through NLTK or spaCy. The founder then sees everyone's responses on a dashboard, high level trends, any insights that can help make better business decisions. From the user's pov, it's conversational and not a survey. Also helps with email deliverability since people reply to your email.

